+++ title = "Summary and further reading" weight = 6 layout = "section" slug = "sec:litt" +++

This introductory chapter covered some of the basic principles of quantum computation and, in doing so, hopefully, made a convincing argument as to why we should expect the programs running on quantum hardware to become more complex in the future, with the intertwining of classical and quantum computations---processes we refer to as hybrid quantum-classical programs. Prior to that, we also presented quantum compilation, an emerging discipline that is introducing many new problems and ideas to the established corpus of work on compiler research.

If this quantum taster has intrigued you or you would like to learn the basics from people who *actually* know what they are talking about, nothing beats the reference book for quantum information and quantum computing by Nielsen and Chuang @Nielsen2016. A fascinating alternative perspective on quantum theory has also been developed within the programme of categorical quantum mechanics, for which the illustrious "Dodo book" @Coecke2017 would be the go-to introductory material[^dodo]. [^dodo]: And while we're on the topic of my supervisor's brilliant work, there is also a very recent textbook, a sort of spiritual successor to @Coecke2017, particularly focused on quantum compilation @Kissinger2024. It is just as worth a read and might appeal more to the computer science-y compiler-y reader.

At the risk of turning this thesis into absolutely shameless Oxford self-promotion, guess what else was a product of this university's _world-class_ research? The quantum circuit itself! These diagrams came from theoretical physicists (no surprise here) interested in capturing thought experiments in quantum information theory @Deutsch1989.

The idea caught on, and soon, software tools were created to facilitate building such diagrams. The Quantum Computation Language (QCL) was one of the first @Oemer2000. Quantum software[^actuallyclassical] has since proliferated, especially as the possibility of actually *performing* these thought experiments on quantum hardware became more tangible. The result was software packages for quantum computing, designed for the automatic transformation and *optimisation* of quantum computations for execution on real hardware @JavadiAbhari2024 @CirqDevelopers2024 @Steiger_2018 @Sivarajah2020---we called them quantum compilers. [^actuallyclassical]: That is _classical_ software written to control and optimise quantum computations.

A recent development for quantum compilers focuses on scalability and first-class support for hybrid quantum-classical computations. Quantum circuits that include some form of classical control have been variously called "dynamic circuits" (e.g. @Corcoles2021), "adaptive circuits" (e.g. @Smith2024), "circuits with measurements and feedforward" (e.g. @Graham2023), and "circuits assisted by local operations and classical communication" (e.g. @Piroli2021).


Besides supporting advances in quantum hardware @Corcoles2021 @Graham2023 @Pino2021, hybrid classical-quantum computations are central to many quantum computing applications. As put recently by Alam and Clark @Alam2024: > "[...] dynamic quantum circuits > are a crucial milestone on the roadmap to fault-tolerant > quantum computers."

We have covered a small subset of applications of hybrid quantum-classical computations. Quantum teleportation is undoubtedly one of the oldest @Bennett1993. The block-encoding technique that we discussed in {{}} is the foundation of several algorithms, including the Quantum Singular Value Decomposition (QSVT) @Gilyen2019 and the Linear Combination of Unitaries (LCU) @Chakraborty2024 @Sze2025. Measurement-based quantum computing (MBQC) was introduced in @Raussendorf_2001 and is forming the base for some photonic quantum computing @Bartolucci_2023 @Bourassa2021. Hybrid programs have also been shown to be useful for implementing the Quantum Fourier Transform (QFT) @Baeumer2024 and the Quantum Phase Estimation (QPE) algorithms @Corcoles2021, two of the most fundamental computation primitives for quantum algorithms. The block-encoding technique that we discussed is


On the other hand, repeat until success schemes @Paetznick2014 are widespread in state preparation routines and will play a key role in fault-tolerant (FT) quantum computing. Arguably, the most well-known scheme for FT is magic state distillation @Bravyi2005, a procedure expected to be a core building block of many FT architectures. State preparation is generally a ubiquitous problem for FT, as the error-correcting codes that are employed initiate computations starting from a "logical" zero state, which may be expensive to prepare on the qubits of the hardware @Fowler2012.

Finally, quantum error-correcting (QEC) codes themselves must be implemented using hybrid programs. The quantum error correction (QEC) literature is vast and can get very technical very quickly, but diving into it promises bountiful rewards. The field is one of quantum information's fastest-evolving areas of research. These work-in-progress lecture notes @Gottesman2024 by a coryphaeus of the field make for excellent introductory material. 