+++
title = "Related work"
weight = 1
layout = "section"
slug = "sec:gts-sota"
+++

**Graph rewriting on computation graphs.**&emsp; Optimisation of computation
graphs is a long-standing problem in computer science that is seeing renewed
interest in the compiler @Lattner_2021, machine learning (ML) @Jia2019 @Fang2020
and quantum computing communities @Xu2022 @Xu2023. In all these domains, graphs
encode computations that are either expensive to execute or evaluated repeatedly
over many iterations, making the optimisation of the execution cost of the
computation a primary concern.

Domain-specific heuristics are the most common approach in compiler
optimisations @pytorch @Sivarajah2020&#x200B;---a more flexible alternative are
optimisation engines based on declarative sets of graph transformations
@Bonchi2022 @Bonchi2022a. In such systems, a graph transformation system (GTS)
is used to find a sequence of allowed transformations that rewrite a computation
graph given as input into a computation graph with minimal cost.

Transformation systems were first studied on strings @Dershowitz1990, then
generalised to trees and terms @Bezem2003, before being applied to graph domains
@Ehrig1973 @Rozenberg1997 @Koenig2018. Their use in quantum computing is part of
a long tradition of diagrammatic reasoning in physics @Penrose1964 @Feynman1949,
and particularly in quantum mechanics with the advent of categorical quantum
mechanics @Abramsky2008 @Coecke2012 @Coecke2017.

**GTS in quantum computing.**&emsp; In quantum computing, the ZX calculus
@Coecke2008 and other diagrammatic theories that derive from it are particularly
important. Properties of GTSs such as completeness, confluence and termination
@Verma1995 are well-studied within this field @Backens2014 @Backens2019
@Biamonte2023. These results have formed the basis for software implementations
of circuit optimisations with soundness and performance guarantees @Duncan2020
@Kissinger2020 @Sivarajah2020 @Borgna2023.

Great strides are also being made in our theoretical understanding of
transformation systems for quantum circuits. Recently, Cl√©ment et al.
established completeness for the first time @Clement2023 as well as minimality
@Clement2024 of a GTS for quantum circuits. A set of circuit transformation
rules were presented such that no rule is redundant, and for any two equivalent
quantum circuits, there exists a sequence of local transformations rewriting one
into the other. Such systems are however not confluent, and this is unlikely to
change: most circuit optimisation problems are known to be computationally hard
@Wetering2024a.

There is also another inherent tension in integrating diagrammatic calculi into
compilers. Diagrammatic theories arise from abstract primitives that admit a
simple rewriting logic @Heurtel2024 @Booth2024 @Felice2023a @Carette2023;
compilers meanwhile must capture all the expressivity, constraints and messiness
of real-world hardware targets, with all the edge cases and exceptions that this
entails.

An example of this is the ZX circuit extraction problem @Quanz2024
@Backens2021&#x200B;: it is in general hard to recover an executable quantum
circuit from a ZX diagram as the latter is strictly more general and primitives
cannot be mapped one-to-one. Similarly, while simple quantum-classical hybrid
computations can be expressed using extensions of ZX @Borgna2021 @Carette2021
@KoziellPipe2024, it will never be possible to capture the full breadth and
generality of classical CPU instruction sets in a practical and extensible (and
algebraically satisfying) way.

**Peephole optimisations.**&emsp; As an alternative to the very principled
approach of elegant calculi, graph transformations can also be used in the
absence of theoretical guarantees in a more ad hoc fashion. Indeed, many
existing (classical and quantum) compiler optimisations can already be
understood as graph transformations. For as long as compilation has existed,
compilers have relied on local transformations of the IR, typically referred to
as peephole optimisations @McKeeman1965 @Tanenbaum1982. Such optimisation
strategies are based on the heuristic that local optimisations to the program
will produce a well-optimised result overall. Mature compiler ecosystems have
developed tools for declarative definitions, as well as automatic generation and
correctness proving of peephole optimisations @Menendez2017 @Lopes2015
@Riddle2021. We refer to the classical compiler literature, e.g. @Muchnick2007,
for more details on the various types of common peephole optimisations.

Quantum compilers adopted peephole-style optimisations from the beginning
@Cheung2007 @Steiger_2018 @Sivarajah2020. They encompass some of the most common
optimisations in quantum computing, including the Euler Angle reduction
@Chatzisavvas2009, the two-qubit KAK decomposition @Tucci2005 @Cross2019 and all
gate set rebases @autorebase. A quantum-specific flavour of peephole
optimisation with close links to GTSs, template matching @Maslov2008 @Iten2022,
achieved state-of-the-art results for Clifford circuit optimisation
@Bravyi2021a. Recently, quantum peephole optimisations were also proposed that
leverage provable state information to perform contextual optimisations
@Liu2021, similar to strength reduction and optimisation with preconditions in
classical compilation @Lopes2015.

**Internal representations.**&emsp; The graph formalisation of quantum
computations we will define in this chapter also draws a lot from the internal
representations (IR) of programs in classical compilers. The classical
compilation community has found significant advantages in sharing a common
standardised IR format. Indeed, while the exact syntax constructs and
abstractions vary across programming languages, and, at the other end of the
compiler stack, the specific assembly instructions emitted differ between
hardware targets, much of the compiler middleware can be broadly shared across
use cases. This gave rise to the LLVM @Lattner2004 and, more recently, the MLIR
@Lattner_2021 projects, which provide common compiler IRs, along with all the
infrastructure compilers typically require: IR transformation tooling,
translation into hardware-specific assembly, efficient serialisations, in-memory
formats etc.

The idea of adopting LLVM for quantum was championed by QIR @qir, a standard
introducing quantum primitives into the LLVM IR. This was subsequently adopted
by many quantum hardware providers for its superior expressive power compared to
circuit-based formats @qirall. Building on top of QIR, an IR specifically for
quantum-classical programs was proposed in @Hugr, with additional soundness
guarantees based, among others, on the no-cloning principle of quantum
information. In parallel, projects with similar aims have also emerged
@McCaskey2021 @Ittah_2022 that use the full MLIR and LLVM toolchain.

**Challenges of GTS for compilation.**&emsp; Peephole optimisations of compiler
IRs have proven to be a fast, general and scalable approach to compilation and
code optimisation in practice. However, the optimisation results depend heavily
on well-designed transformation orderings and the performance may vary widely
across (equivalent) input programs. This is commonly known in compiler research
as the phase ordering problem @Click1995&#x200B;. When a compiler can modify
code in multiple ways, it must determine which transformations to apply and in
what sequence to achieve optimal results @Whitfield1997 @Liang2023. This is a
common design challenge in GTSs, often addressed through mechanisms such as rule
controls @Heckel2020.

This issue is also a key challenge within quantum compilation, as can be
verified by comparing the performance of peephole-based compilers with provably
optimal circuit synthesis strategies. On problem sizes where exhaustive search
is feasible, unitary synthesis tools can sometimes outperform current, mostly
peephole-based compilers @Sivarajah2020 by up to 50%[^cost] @Wu2020.

[^cost]: at the cost of many hours of compute, of course.
